Add article on how to a create key pair for a workload cluster via the Management API (#1054)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/ui-api/management-api/wc-key-pairs/index.md

---
linkTitle: Key pairs for workload clusters
title: Creating workload cluster key pairs via the Management API

> description: We recommend OIDC for authentication to the workload cluster Kubernetes API. However, in some scenarios, X.509 key pairs are a viable alternative. Here we explain a Giant Swarms specific way to create such key pairs via the Management API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: We recommend OIDC for authentication to the workload cluster Kubernetes API. However, in some scenarios, X.509 key pairs are a viable alternative. Here we explain a Giant Swarm specific way to create such key pairs via the Management API.
```

weight: 50
menu:
  main:
    identifier: uiapi-managementapi-keypairs
    parent: uiapi-managementapi
user_questions:
  - How to create workload cluster key pairs via the Management API?
last_review_date: 2021-07-26
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-biscuit
---

# Creating workload cluster key pairs via the Management API

We recommend OIDC for authentication to the workload cluster Kubernetes API. However, in some scenarios, X.509 key pairs are a viable alternative. Here we explain a method specific to Giant Swarm to create such key pairs via the Management API.

> **Note:** The method described here makes use of the [`CertConfig`]({{< relref "/ui-api/management-api/crd/certconfigs.core.giantswarm.io.md" >}}) <abbr title="custom resource definition">CRD</abbr></a> and [cert-operator](https://github.com/giantswarm/cert-operator), which are currently part of every Giant Swarm management cluster. As Giant Swarm is shifting towards using Cluster API controllers, this method will not work once this transition is done. Please consider it a temporary solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** The method described here makes use of the [`CertConfig`]({{< relref "/ui-api/management-api/crd/certconfigs.core.giantswarm.io.md" >}}) <abbr title="custom resource definition">CRD</abbr></a> and [cert-operator](https://github.com/giantswarm/cert-operator), which is currently part of every Giant Swarm management cluster. As Giant Swarm is shifting towards using Cluster API controllers, this method will not work once this transition is done. Please consider it a temporary solution.
```

> **Note:** The method described here makes use of the [`CertConfig`]({{< relref "/ui-api/management-api/crd/certconfigs.core.giantswarm.io.md" >}}) <abbr title="custom resource definition">CRD</abbr></a> and [cert-operator](https://github.com/giantswarm/cert-operator), which are part of every Giant Swarm management cluster currently. As Giant Swarm is shifting towards using Cluster API controllers, this method is not guaranteed to work once this transition is done. Please consider it a temporary solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** The method described here makes use of the [`CertConfig`]({{< relref "/ui-api/management-api/crd/certconfigs.core.giantswarm.io.md" >}}) <abbr title="custom resource definition">CRD</abbr></a> and [cert-operator](https://github.com/giantswarm/cert-operator), which are currently part of every Giant Swarm management cluster. As Giant Swarm is shifting towards using Cluster API controllers, this method will not work once this transition is done. Please consider it a temporary solution.
```

**Note:** If you want to use the deprecated Giant Swarm Rest API for creating key pairs, please check [`gsctl create kubeconfig`]({{< relref "/ui-api/gsctl/create-kubeconfig.md" >}}) and [`gsctl create keypair`]({{< relref "/ui-api/gsctl/create-keypair.md" >}}).

## Prerequisites

You need:

> - Your installation's Management API endpoint (similar to `https://g8s.codename.eu-west-1.aws.gigantic.io`)or base domain (similar to `codename.eu-west-1.aws.gigantic.io`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Your installation's Management API endpoint (similar to `https://g8s.codename.eu-west-1.aws.gigantic.io`) or base domain (similar to `codename.eu-west-1.aws.gigantic.io`).
```

- Management API access as an admin.
- Unique ID of the workload cluster to grant access to.
- Name of the organization "owning" that workload cluster.

These tools are also required:

- `kubectl`
- [kubectl gs]({{< relref "/ui-api/kubectl-gs/" >}}), the `kubectl` plug-in for the Giant Swarm Management API.

If you want to use our [example script](#script), you also need:

- [jq](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/)
- The shell commands/utilities `base64`, `cut`, `date`, and `shasum`

## Ensure Management API access

Using our `kubectl` plug-in, you can make sure to be authenticated against the Management API:

```nohighlight
kubectl gs login <URL>
```

Here, `<URL>` can be either

> - the Management API endpoint URL or host name

Reviewer: what does 'URL or host name' mean here?

Author: It means you can use either `https://blah` or `blah`

> - your installation's web interface URL or host name

Reviewer: do we explicitly refer to happa elsewhere, in a situation like this?

Author: No, we call it the web interface officially and even decided to not use the term "happa" any more in communication.

Reviewer: Works for me

See the [`kubectl gs login` reference]({{< relref " /ui-api/kubectl-gs/login.md" >}}) for details.

## Create a CertConfig resource

The [`CertConfig`]({{< relref "/ui-api/management-api/crd/certconfigs.core.giantswarm.io.md" >}}) resource, which is reconciled by cert-operator, allows to request the creation of a key pair. While it is designed for a number of different purposes, e. g. management cluster components, when configured the right way, the key pair is valid for authentication with a particular workload cluster's Kubernetes API.

Here is an example of a `CertConfig` resource manifest. Follow the detailed explanations below.

```yaml
apiVersion: core.giantswarm.io/v1alpha1
kind: CertConfig
metadata:
  name: mycert-20210726
  namespace: default
  labels:

>     cert-operator.giantswarm.io/version: 0.1.0

Reviewer: It's pretty brutal customers have to care about this :D

Author: Does this need explanation? Do we have to update this every time cert-operator is released? Do we want to remove this and default it via an admission controller?

Reviewer: > Does this need explanation?

i have a hunch we can get away with it

> Do we have to update this every time cert-operator is released?

We'd need to update it if we get rid of this cert-operator version, which i don't see happening until we just get rid of cert-operator entirely.

> Do we want to remove this and default it via an admission controller?

Not really :D

    giantswarm.io/certificate: mycert
    giantswarm.io/cluster: a1b2c
    giantswarm.io/organization: myorg
spec:
  cert:
    allowBareDomains: true
    clusterComponent: mycert
    clusterID: a1b2c
    commonName: mycert.a1b2c.k8s.codename.eu-west-1.aws.gigantic.io
    disableRegeneration: true
    organizations:
      - developers
      - monitoring
    ttl: 1h
  versionBundle:
    version: 0.1.0
```

Here is how you should adapt the example to match your case:

- `.metadata`:
    - `.name`: name for this `CertConfig` resource, unique within the management cluster.
    - `.labels`:

>         - `giantswarm.io/certificate`: an identifier for this key pair that must be unique within the management cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - `.giantswarm.io/certificate`: an identifier for this key pair that must be unique within the management cluster.
```

>         - `giantswarm.io/cluster`: ID of the workload cluster to grant access to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - `.giantswarm.io/cluster`: ID of the workload cluster to grant access to.
```

>         - `giantswarm.io/organization`: Name of the organization owning the above workload cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - `.giantswarm.io/organization`: Name of the organization owning the above workload cluster.
```

- `.spec`:
    - `.cert`:
        - `.clusterComponent`: set this to the same value as the `giantswarm.io/certificate` label.
        - `.clusterID`: set this to the same value as the `giantswarm.io/cluster` label.
        - `.commonName`: the `CN` that the created certificate will have. Set this to a unique string ending with your workload cluster's Kubernetes API endpoint domain.
        - `.organizations`: defines the RBAC groups set in the created certificate via the `O` attribute. You can include `system:masters` here to create an admin key pair. Check the security notice below.

>         - `ttl`: The duration until the created certificate will expire. `1h` stands for one hour. Check the security notice below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - `.ttl`: The duration until the created certificate will expire. `1h` stands for one hour. Check the security notice below.
```
